In this lecture, you'll learn about the different etherchannel protocols and how to configure and verify
them.
So there's three available protocols. That's LACP and PaGP and static.
So first one is LACP, the link aggregation control protocol.
This is an open standard.
So it's supported an all vendor switches. With LACP,
the switches on both sides negotiate the portchannel creation and maintenance. And all of the three available
methods,
this is the preferred one to use.
Next one we have is PaGP, which is Cisco's proprietary port aggregation protocol.
This works similarly to LACP.
Wherever switches on both sides again negotiate the portchannel creation and maintenance.
But it's not recommended to use PaGP because it's proprietary.
And the third option we have is to configure a static etherchannel. With static,
the switches do not negotiate creation and maintenance, but the settings must still march on both sides
for the portchannel to come up.
So with all three, you've got two switches
that've got links going between them and you're going to configure those into a portchannel.
You need to configure the same settings on both sides, on both switches. And for static,
this is the one that we'll use if LACP is not supported on both sides. LACP will be supported
on all Cisco switches, but maybe you're connecting to another vendor switch or a server or something
like that.
So those are the three different options.
The configuration for all is really, really similar.
They all actually use the same command, which is the channel group command, but it's on the keywords
that we use along with Channel Group that decides which of the three protocols is going to be used.
For the parameters for either chinless, I touched on this just a minute ago where I said that the configuration
has to match on both sides of the link.
The interfaces need to have a matching configuration.
So settings that have to be the same on both sides include the speed and duplex,  whether the port
is set to access or trunk mode.
The native VLAN, the allowed VLANs on there, and the access VLAN, if it's an access port.
So looking at the configuration. The first one we look at is LACP. Your LACP interfaces can be set as either active
or passive.
So let's see, we're going to configure a portchannel between Switch1 and Switch2. If Switch1's
interfaces are as active and Switch2 as passive, the portchannel will come up.
But if both sides are set as passive, the portchannel will not come up. And if both sides are active,
the portchannel will come up.
So it's recommended to configure both sides as active.
Your choices are either both sides as active or one side is active and one side is passive.
It's easiest just to configureboth as active because then you don't need to worry about which is
the active side and which is the passive side.
So here's our configuration, it's configured at the interface level. So specify the interfaces you want
to group in the portchannel.
Here we're seeing interface range fa0/23 - 24, and then our command is channel-group 1
mode active.
As soon as you enter that command, it will create a new logical interface, which is your portchannel
interface.
Here we're configuring channel-group 1, so that would create portchannel 1.
The reason that there's a number here is that you might have different portchannels going to different
neighbor switches. So let's say that we have Switch1.
We've got a portchannel going to Switch2, we could make that portchannel 1. If we've also got
a portchannel going to Switch3,
We could make that portchannel 2.
So that's the command to create your portchannel. After the portchannel has been created, most of
your interface settings are set at the portchannel level.
So to do that,
we say interface portchannel 1, and then switchport mode trunk.
We would also set the native VLAN, the allowed VLANs, etc.,
at this level.
And you need to configure those matching settings on the switch on the other side as well. So you see
that the configuration here is exactly the same.
We did it first on Switch1 and then we do a matching configuration on Switch2.
So that was LACP.
So if LACP, it's channel-group command and then you use either active or passive. The configuration for PaGP
is the same, but rather than using active or passive, we use desirable or auto.
And it's similar rules that we had with LACP where if one side is desirable and the other is auto, then
the portchannel will come up.
If both sides are auto, it won't.
And if both sides are desirable, it will.
So again, if you are going to use PaGP, which is not recommended, then set both sides as desirable.
Then you don't need to worry about which is desirable and which is auto.
So looking at the config, exactly the same as it was for LACP. But here we say channel-group 1 mode desirable
rather than channel one, channel-group 1 mode active.
So you can tell by the keyword at the end whether it's going to be LACP or PaGP. Or, when we get to
the next slide, static. For static,
again, it's exactly the same configuration, but we say channel-group 1 mode on. So active for LACP,
desirable for PaGP and on for static. Rest of the configuration
exactly the same for all of them.
So that's how we configure it. How we verify it, there's one Swiss Army knife command for checking
etherchannel, which is show etherchannel summary. And you see the flags just under there.
So it tells you what all the letters actually mean here.
Looking down at the bottom, we can see that this is Group 1, our first portchannel. The portchannel interface
is Portchannel 1, and in brackets I see a capital S and a capital U.
The capital S means it's in layer 2 portchannel.
You can also configure a layer 3 portchannel as well. On the interface, you would
say no switchport and put an IP address on there.
But more commonly it's going to be a layer 2 portchannel.
The capital U means it's in use, which basically means that it is up.
I can see that the protocol is LACP and over on the right I can see that my ports are fa0/23
and fa0/24.
A capital P means they are in the portchannel. For a layer 2 portchannel,
if you see any letters other than exactly what you see here, there's a problem with the portchannel and
it's not going to come up. If there is a problem with your portchannel,
by far, the most common issue is that your settings do not match on both sides.
So look at the interface, both the physical interface level and also at the portchannel interface level as
well.
And just make sure that the settings are exactly the same on both sides.
Also, make sure that you've selected the correct interfaces that are cabled to each other as well.
OK, so that was our show
etherchannel summary command. You can also just show etherchannel and that will give you
more verbose output, but summary really tells you everything that you need to know.
The last command to look at is show spanning-tree vlan. Because as we explained before, the reason
for using etherchannel is to avoid spanning-tree shutting down some of your links.
So after you've configured this, you want to check the
spanning-tree is working as you would like.
So the example here is before we've configured etherchannel. If you look at the picture over at the
right, we've got a Switch Access 3 with uplinks going to our switch CD1, the core distribution one.
CD1 is the root bridge for spanning-tree.
And if we look at Access3, it's got two links going up to CD1.
If we don't put those in a portchannel, then spanning-tree sees them as a potential loop,
and it's going to block one of the links. Looking at the output of our show spanning-tree vlan 1
command here,
look down on the bottom,
I can see that fa0/23
is forwarding. It's the root port on Access3. And fa0/24 is blocking to prevent the loop.
So these are fast Ethernet interfaces.
In our example, I'm only getting 100Mbps of uplink bandwidth rather than 200Mbps with my two ports.
To fix that, we configure etherchannel.
After you have configured etherchannel, we can put the same command. And again,
show spanning-tree vlan 1
And now if I go back a slide, before the portchannel, you see that spanning-tree saw the physical interfaces,
fa0/23 and fa0/24.
When we put those in a portchannel, spanning-tree just sees that one logical interface.
So it sees it as being one link, which is not a potential loop as far as spanning-tree is concerned.
So now on the portchannel, it is forwarding. I don't have any ports that are blocking.
I get the full bandwidth of both physical interfaces now.
OK, so that was our configuration and verification.
See you in the next lecture.